UNIT
#
5' cap 
The 5' end of a pre-mRNA molecule modified by the addition of a cap of guanine nucleotide.
10% rule 
Only 10% of the total energy produced at each trophic level is available to the next level. The amount of energy passed up to the levels of the food pyramid reduces as you go up.
UNIT
A
Abdominal Cavity 
Cavity housing intestines.
Abiotic Factors 
Nonliving components of environment.
Abscisic Acid
A plant hormone that slows down growth, promotes seed dormancy and facilitates drought tolerance.
Absorption Spectrum 
A graph plotting a pigment light light absorption.
Acclimatization 
Adjusting to a new range of environmental temperatures.
Acetylcholine 
Common vertebrate neurotransmitter, especially in neuromuscular junctions.
Acetyl-CoA 
Is formed when pyruvate first enters into the mitochondria via active transport.
Acquired Immunity 
Immunity that is present only after exposure and is highly specific.
AIDS
The most advanced, and fatal, stage of an HIV infection.
Action Potential 
A neural impulse; a brief electrical charge that travels down an axon.
Action Spectrum 
A profile of the relative performance of the different wavelengths in photosynthesis.
Activation Energy 
The amount of energy needed to push the reactants over an energy barrier.
Activator 
A protein that binds to DNA and stimulates transcription of a specific gene.
Active Immunity 
A form of acquired immunity in which the body produces its own antibodies against disease-causing antigens.
Active Site 
A pocket or groove on the surface of the enzyme.
Active Transport 
When a cell gets materials or excretes them by using its own energy, usually through ATP; going against a concentration gradient.
Actual Evapotranspiration 
Annual amount of water transpired by plants and evaporated from landscape.
Actual Range 
Area an organism actually occupies.
Adaptive Radiation 
Evolution of many new species from a common ancestor as a result of introduction to new environments.
Addition Rule 
Considering mutually exclusive events, the probability of both occurring is the sum of the probabilities of each event.
Adenylyl Cyclase 
Converts ATP to cyclic AMP in response to an extracellular signal.
Adhesion 
Water molecules sticking to other surfaces.
Adipose Tissue 
Tissue that stores fat.
Age Structure 
Relative number of individuals at each age.
Aggregate Fruit 
A fruit derived from a single flower that has more than one carpel.
Agonistic Behavior 
Competition that determines who wins a prize, such as food or mates.
Alcohol Fermentation 
When pyruvate is converted to ethanol in 2 steps.
Allele 
One of the alternative forms of a gene that governs a characteristic, such as hair color.
Allele Frequency 
Proportion of an allele in a gene pool.
Allometric Growth 
Proportioning that gives a body a specific form.
Allopatric Speciation 
When a population is divided; leads to speciation.
Allopolyploid 
Sterile hybrid is changed to a fertile polyploid due to mutation; fertile with each other, but not parent species.
Allosteric Regulation 
When a protein's function at one site is affected by the binding of a regulatory molecule to a separate site.
Alpha Glucose 
Monomer for starch and glycogen.
Alteration of Generations 
The alteration of two or more different forms in the life cycle of a plant or animal.
Alternative RNA Splicing 
Genes giving rise to two or more different polypeptides depending upon which segments are treated as exons.
Altruism 
Behavior that benefits another without benefiting oneself.
Aminocentesis 
Prenatal diagnostic technique that involves inserting a needle to obtain a sample of amniotic fluid that surrounds the fetus.
Amphipathic 
Molecules are said to be this when it has regions that are both hydrophilic and hydrophobic.
Anabolic Pathways 
Metabolic pathways that consume energy to build complicated molecules from simpler ones.
Anabolism 
Metabolic pathways that construct molecules, requiring energy.
Anaerobic 
Occurs by fermentation, which generate ATP solely by substrate-level phosphorylation.
Analogy 
Anatomical similarity due to convergent evolution.
Anaphylactic Shock 
A severe reaction that occurs when an allergen is introduced to the bloodstream of an allergic individual. Characterized by bronchoconstriction, labored breathing, widespread vasodilation, circulatory shock, and sometimes sudden death.
Anatomy 
Study of the structure of an organism.
Aneuploidy 
Abnormal number of chromosomes.
Anther 
In an angiosperm, the terminal pollen sac of a stamen, where pollen grains containing sperm-producing male gametophytes form.
Antibiotic Resistance 
Resistance evolving rapidly in many species of prokaryotes due to overuse of antibiotics, especially in agriculture.
Antibiotics 
Interfere with production of peptidoglycan; harm bacteria but not eukaryotes.
Antibodies 
Protein that is produced by lymphocytes and that attaches to a specific antigen.
Anticodon 
Specialized base triplet at one end of a tRNA molecule that recognizes a particular complementary codon on an mRNA molecule.
Antigen 
Any foreign molecule that is specifically recognized by lymphocytes and elicits an immune response.
Antigen Presentation 
The process by which an MHC molecule binds to a fragment of an intracellular protein antigen and carries it to the cell surface, where it is displayed and can be recognized by a T cell.
Apoptosis 
Programmed cell death.
Aposematic Coloration 
Bright warning colors in animals with a chemical defense.
Aquaporin 
A membrane protein, specifically a transport protein, that facilitates the passage of water through channel proteins.
Archaea 
Domain of unicellular prokaryotes that have cell walls lacking peptidoglycan. Like eukaryotes, DNA contains histone proteins.
Artificial Selection 
Humans modifying species for desired traits through selective breeding.
Asexual Reproduction 
One parent produces a genetically identical offspring by mitosis.
Associative Learning 
The ability of animals to associate one feature with another.
Asters 
Microtubules and fibers that radiate out from the centrioles.
Astrocytes 
Provide structural and metabolic support for neurons.
Adenosine Triphosphate 
Composed of a sugar ribose, nitrogenous base adenine, and a chain of three phosphate groups bonded to it.
ATP synthase 
The enzyme that make ATP from ADPand inorganic phosphate.
Autoimmune Diseases 
Diseases caused when the immune system loses tolerance for self and turns against certain molecules in the body.
Autonomic Nervous System 
The part of the nervous system of vertebrates that controls involuntary actions of the smooth muscles and heart and glands.
Autopolyploid 
Having more than two sets of chromosomes from a single species.
Autosomes 
Chromosomes that are not directly involved in determining the sex of an individual.
Auxin 
Indoleacetic acid (IAA), a natural plant hormone that has a variety of effects, including cell elongation, root formation, secondary growth, and fruit growth.
Avirulent 
A term describing a pathogen that can only mildly harm, but not kill, the host plant.
Axon 
Long nerve fiber that conducts away from the cell body of the neuron.
Axon Hillock 
Cone shaped region of an axon where it joins the cell body.
UNIT
B
Bacilli 
Rod-shaped bacteria.
Bacterial Artificial Chromosome
An artificial version of a bacterial chromosome that can carry inserts of 100, 000 to 500, 000 base pairs.
Bacteriophage 
A virus that infects bacteria; also called a phage.
Bacteriophages 
A virus that infects bacteria; also called a phage.
Barr Body 
A dense body formed from a deactivated X chromosome.
Basal Metabolic Rate 
The metabolic rate of a nongrowing, resting, fasting, nonstressed endotherm.
Basement Membrane 
Cells at the base of an epithelial layer are attached to this.
Batesian Mimicry 
Species mimics the appearance of an unpalatable or harmful.
B Cell Receptor 
The antigen receptor on B cells: a Y-Shaped, membrane-bound molecule consisting of two identical heavy chains and two identical light chains linked by disulfide bridges and containing two antigen-binding sites.
Behavior 
The way an organism reacts to changes in its internal condition or external environment.
Behavioral Isolation 
Incompatible courtship rituals, pheromones, or bird songs.
Beta Glucose 
Monomer for cellulose and chitin.
Big-bang Reproduction 
Species that have only a single reproductive opportunity, such as agave and salmon.
Binary Fission 
A form of asexual reproduction in single-celled organisms by which one cell divides into two cells of the same size.
Bioenergenetics 
The study of how organisms manage their energy resources.
Bioenergetics 
Flow of energy through an animal. Limits its behavior, growth, reproduction.
Biogeographic Realms 
Broad patterns of distribution due to continental drift and barriers such as deserts and mountain ranges.
Biogeography 
Geographic distribution of species.
Biological augmentation 
Uses organisms to add essential materials to degraded ecosystems.
Biological Clock 
An innate mechanism in living organisms that controls the periodicity of many physiological functions.
Biological Magnification 
Toxins become more concentrated in successive trophic levels.
Biological Species Concept 
Species is a group of populations whose members have the potential to produce fertile offspring.
Biomanipulation 
Technique for restoring eutrophic lakes that reduces populations of algae by manipulating higher-level consumers.
Biomass 
Total dry mass of all individuals in a population.
Biome 
Major types of ecological association that occupy broad geographic regions.
Bionomial Nomenclature 
Scientific name.
Bioremediation 
Use of living organisms such as prokaryotes, fungi, or plants to detoxify polluted ecosystems.
Biosphere 
The sum of all ecosystems.
Biota 
Biotic factors.
Biotechnology 
The manipulation of living organisms or their components to produce useful products.
Biotic factors 
All the plant and animal life of a particular region.
Blood 
Connective tissue made of plasma, erythrocytes, leukocytes, and platelets.
Blue-light Photoreceptors 
A class of light receptors in plants. Blue light initiates a variety of responses, such as phototropism and slowing of hypocotyl elongation.
B Lymphocytes
Lymphocyte that matures in the bone marrow and secretes antibodies.
Bone 
Mineralized connective tissue.
Bottleneck Effect 
When a population has been dramatically reduced, and the gene pool is no longer reflective of the original population's.
Bottom-up Model 
Unidirectional influence from lower to higher trophic levels. (V --> H)
Brainstem 
The oldest part and central core of the brain, responsible for automatic survival functions.
Brown Fat
Tissue in neck and between shoulders of some mammals that is specialized for rapid heat production.
UNIT
C
Calvin Cycle 
Carbon fixation process in photosynthesis. Forms sugar and other organic compounds.
Cancer 
Any malignant growth or tumor caused by abnormal and uncontrolled cell division.
Capsid 
The protein shell that encloses a viral genome. It may be rod-shaped, polyhedral, or more complex in shape.
Capsule 
Covers the cell wall in prokaryotes.
Carbon Fixation 
The initial incorporation of carbon into organic compounds.
Cardiac Muscle 
Muscle that is branched, striated, singe nucleated.
Carotenoids 
Accessory pigments that broaden the spectrum of colors that can drive photosynthesis.
Carpel 
The ovule-producing reproductive organ of a flower, consisting of the stigma, style, and ovary.
Carrier Protein 
A membrane protein, specifically a transport protein, that holds onto molecules and changes their shapes in a way that shuttles them across the membrane.
Carrying Capacity
Maximum population size that a particular environment can support.
Cartilage 
Made of collagenous fibers in matrix of chondroitin sulfate.
Catabolic Pathways 
Metabolic pathways that release energy by breaking down complex molecules into simpler compounds.
Catabolism 
Metabolic pathways that break down molecules, releasing energy.
Catalyst 
A chemical agent that speeds up a reaction without being consumed by the reaction.
Cdk 
Complex of cyclin and kinase.
cDNA Library 
A limited gene library using complementary DNA. The library includes only the genes that were transcribed in the cells examined.
Cell Body 
Contains most of a neuron's organelles and its nucleus.
Cell-cell Recognition 
The function of membrane proteins in which some glycoproteins serve as ID tags that are recognized by membrane proteins of other cells.
Cell Cycle 
Series of events that cells go through as they grow and divide.
Cell Differentiation 
The process by which a cell becomes specialized for a specific structure or function.
Cell Division 
The process in reproduction and growth by which a cell divides to form daughter cells.
Cell-mediated Immune Response 
The branch of acquired immunity that involves the activation of cytotoxic T cells, which defend against infected cells.
Cell Plate 
A double membrane across the midline of a dividing plant cell, between which the new cell wall forms during cytokinesis.
Cellular Respiration 
When oxygen is consumed as a reactant along with the organic fuel.
Cellulose 
Carbohydrate component of plant cell walls.
Cell Wall 
Strong layer around the cell membrane in plants, algae, and some bacteria.
Central Nervous System 
Includes the brain and spinal cord.
Centriole 
In animal cells, a cytoplasmic organelle that organizes the mitotic spindle fibers during cell reproductions.
Centromere 
The region of the chromosome that holds the two sister chromatids together during mitosis.
Centrosome 
A structure in animal cells containing centrioles from which the spindle fibers develop.
Cerebellum 
The "little brain" attached to the rear of the brainstem; it helps coordinate voluntary movement and balance.
Cerebral Cortex 
Interconnected neural cells that covers the cerebral hemispheres; the body's ultimate control and information-processing center.
Cerebral Hemispheres 
The right and left halves of the cerebrum.
Cerebrum 
Largest part of the brain; responsible for voluntary muscular activity, vision, speech, taste, hearing, thought, and memory.
Channel Protein 
A membrane protein, specifically a transport protein, that has a hydrophilic channel that certain molecules or atomic ions use as a tunnel.
Character 
A heritable feature that varies among individuals.
Character Displacement 
Tendency of characteristics to be more divergent in sympatric populations than allopatric populations.
Chemiosmosis 
Process by which a Hydrogen pump pumps protons into the thylakoid membrane. H+ passively flows through the ATP synthase which leads to the creation of ATP.
Chemoautotrophs 
Organisms that use hydrogen sulfide or other chemicals as energy source instead of light.
Chiasmata 
X-shaped regions where crossing over occurred.
Chitin 
Polysaccharide found in arthropod exoskeletons and fungal cell walls.
Chlorophyll 
Green pigment located within the chloroplasts.
Chlorophyll A
Only pigment that can participate directly in the light reactions.
Chloroplasts 
Organelles that capture the energy from sunlight and convert it into chemical energy in a process called photosynthesis.
Cholesterol 
Steroid common in cell membranes, also in many hormones.
Chondrocytes 
Cells that secrete cartilage.
Chorionic Villus Sampling 
Prenatal diagnostic technique that involves taking a sample of tissue from the chorion.
Chromatin 
The complex of DNA and proteins that makes up a eukaryotic chromosome.
Chromosomes 
A threadlike, gene-carrying structure found in the nucleus. Consists of one very long DNA molecule and associated proteins.
Chromosome Theory of Inheritance 
According to this theory, genes are carried from parents to their offspring on chromosomes.
Circadian Rhythm 
A physiological cycle of about 24 hours that is present in all eukaryotic organisms and that persists even in the absence of external cues.
Citric Acid Cycle 
Completes the breakdown of glucose by oxidizing a derivative of pyruvate to carbon dioxide.
Clade 
A taxonomic grouping that includes only a single ancestor and all of its descendants.
Cladistics 
A phylogenetic classification system that uses shared derived characters and ancestry as the sole criterion for grouping taxa.
Cladogram 
Diagram that shows patterns of shared characteristics.
Classical Conditioning 
An arbitrary stimulus is associated with an award or punishment.
Cleavage 
The process of cytokinesis in animal cells, characterized by pinching of the plasma membrane; specifically.
Cleavage Furrow 
The first sign of cleavage in an animal cell; a shallow groove in the cell surface near the old metaphase plate.
Climate 
Prevailing weather conditions of an area.
Cline
A graded change in a trait along a geographic axis.
Clone 
An identical genetically individual of the parent
Cloning 
Making a genetically identical copy of DNA or of an organism.
Cloning Vector 
DNA molecules that can carry foreign DNA into a host cell and replicate there.
Clumped Dispersion 
The most common pattern of dispersion; individuals aggregated in patches.
Cocci 
Spherical bacteria.
Codominance 
When which the phenotypes of both alleles are exhibited in the heterozygote.
Codons 
mRNA base triplets.
Coefficient of Relatedness 
Probability that if two individuals share common parent or ancestor, a particular gene present in one will be present in other.
Coenzyme 
If the cofactor is an organic molecule.
Coevolution 
Reciprocal evolutionary adaptations of two interacting species.
Cofactor 
Non-protein helpers that may be bound tightly to the enzyme as a permanent resident, or may bind loosely and reversibly along with the substrate.
Cognition 
The ability of an animal's nervous system to perceive, store, process, and use information gathered by sensory receptors.
Cognitive Maps 
An internal representation of the spatial relationships between objects in an animal's surroundings.
Cohesion 
Water molecules sticking to each other.
Cohort 
A group of individuals of the same age.
Coleoptile 
Covers and protects the shoot as it grows upward.
Collagenous Fibers 
Fibers made of collagen.
Colonies 
Collections of autonomously replicating cells.
Columnar Epithelium 
Cells shaped like bricks standing on end.
Commensalism 
Interaction between species that benefits one but neither helps or harms the other. (+/0)
Communication 
Signals among animals that include sounds, odors, visual displays, and touches that produce responses.
Community 
All species that inhabit an area.
Comparative Embryology 
Embryos of vertebrates share many anatomical homologies.
Competitive Exclusion 
Strong competition can lead to local elimination of one of the species.
Competitive Exclusion Principle 
Two species competing for same limiting resource cannot coexist in one place; one species will have an advantage that will eventually lead to competitive exclusion
Competitive Inhibitors 
Reduce the productivity of enzymes by blocking substrates from entering active sites.
Complementary DNA
DNA molecule made in vitro using mRNA as a template and the enzyme reverse transcriptase.
Complement System 
A group of about 30 blood proteins that may amplify the inflammatory response, enhance phagocytosis, or directly lyse extracellular pathogens.
Complete Dominance 
When the phenotypes of the heterozygote and dominant homozygote are indistinguishable.
Complete Flower 
A flower that has all four basic floral organs: sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels.
Concentration Gradient 
A difference in the concentration of a substance across a distance.
Conformer 
An animal that allows its internal condition to vary with certain external changes.
Conjugation 
In bacteria, the direct transfer of DNA between two cells that are temporarily joined.
Connective Tissue 
Tissue that functions mainly to bind and support other tissues.
Conservation Biology 
Integrates ecology, physiology, molecular biology, genetics and evolutionary biology to conserve biological diversity.
Contractile Vacuoles 
A membranous sac that helps move excess water out of the cell.
Control Elements 
Segments of noncoding DNA in eukaryotic genes that help regulate transcription by binding to certain proteins.
Cooperativity 
It amplifies the response of enzymes to substrates.
Corpus Callosum 
Nerves that enable communication between the right and left cerebral hemispheres.
Cotransport 
The coupling of the "downhill" diffusion of one substance to the "uphill" transport of another against its own concentration gradient.
Countercurrent Heat Exchanger 
In ectotherms, a circulatory adaptation that is an arrangement of blood vessels that warm or cool the blood.
Crenation 
This happens when a cell shrinks and shrivels; can result in cell death if severe.
Cristae 
Infoldings of the inner membrane of a mitochondrion that houses the electon transport chain and the enzyme catalyzing the synthesis of ATP.
Critical Load 
The amount of added nutrient that can be absorbed by plants without damaging ecosystem.
Crossing Over 
Process in which homologous chromosomes exchange portions of their chromatids during meiosis.
Cryptic Coloration 
Camouflage; makes an organism difficult to spot.
Cubiodal Epithelium 
Dice-shaped cells.
Culture 
A system of information transfer through influential social learning or teaching.
Cyclic AMP
A compound formed from ATP that acts as a second messenger.
Cyclic Photophosphorolation 
Only Photosystem I works. ATP is made, no oxygen is produced, no water is split, no NADPH is made.
Cystic Fibrosis 
A genetic disorder that is present at birth and affects both the respiratory and digestive systems.
Cytogenetic Maps 
A chart of a chromosome that locates genes with respect to chromosomal features distinguishable in a microscope.
Cytokines 
Chemicals released by the immune system communicate with the brain.
Cytokinesis 
Division of the cytoplasm to form two separate daughter cells.
Cytokinins 
A class of plant hormones that retard aging and act in concert with auxin to stimulate cell division, influence the pathway of differentiation, and control apical dominance.
Cytolysis 
This happens when a cell swells until pressure bursts it, resulting in cell death.
Cytoplasm 
The region of the cell between the cell membrane and the nucleus.
Cytoplasmic Determinants 
Maternal substances in egg that influence the course of early development.
Cytoplasmic Streaming 
The motion of cytoplasm in a cell that results in a coordinated movement of the cell's contents.
Cytoskeleton 
Network of protein filaments within some cells that helps the cell maintain its shape and is involved in many forms of cell movement.
Cytosol 
The soluble portion of the cytoplasm, which includes molecules and small particles, such as ribosomes, but not the organelles covered with membranes.
Cytotoxic T Cells 
T cells that directly attack infecting organisms; these cells attack antigen labeled foreign or host tissue.
UNIT
D
Daily Torpor 
in small mammals and birds, daily lowering of metabolism that allows them to survive on stored energy
Day-neutral Plant 
A plant whose flowering is not affected by photoperiod.
Decent With Modification 
Darwin's way of referring to evolution.
De-etiolation 
The changes a plant shoot undergoes in response to sunlight; also known informally as greening.
Dehydration Synthesis 
Condensation reaction where molecules are connected by loss of a water molecule.
Deletion 
A change to a chromosome in which a fragment of the chromosome is removed.
Demographic Transition 
Movement from a high birth rate, high death rate to a low birth rate, low death rate.
Demography 
Study of vital statistics of a population and how they change over time.
Denaturation 
In proteins, a process in which a protein unravels and loses its native conformation, thereby becoming biologically inactive. In DNA, the separation of the two strands of the double helix.
Dendrites 
Highly branched extensions that receive signals from other neurons.
Density Dependent Inhibition 
The arrest of cell division that occurs when cells grown in a laboratory dish touch one another.
Density-dependent Regulation 
When birth or death rates do change with population density.
Sensity-independent Eegulation 
When birth or death rates do not change with population density.
Depolarization 
The process during the action potential when sodium is rushing into the cell causing the interior to become more positive.
Determination 
The point during development at which a cell becomes committed to a particular fate due to cytoplasmic effects or to induction by neighboring cells.
Detritivores 
Obtain energy from detritus.
Detritus 
Nonliving organic maters such as remains of dead organisms, feces, fallen leaves, dead wood.
Diacylglycerol 
A second messenger produced by the cleavage of a certain kind of phospholipid in the plasma membrane.
Dialysis 
The diffusion of small solutes through a selectively permeable membrane.
Differential Gene Expression 
The expression of different sets of genes by cells with the same genome.
Diffusion 
When a substance moves from an area of higher concentration to an area of lower concentration. Due to entropy.
Digestion 
To break apart.
Dihybrids 
Parents that are heterozygous for two characters.
Dioecious 
If staminate and carpellate flowers are on different plants.
Diploid Cell 
Has two sets of chromosomes.
Directional Selection 
Shift toward a favorable variation.
Discrete Characteristics 
Characteristics that are classified on an either-or basis, determined by a single gene locus.
Dispersal 
Movement of individuals away from centers of high population density or their area of origin.
Dispersion 
Pattern of spacing among individuals.
Disruptive Selection 
Shift toward the extremes.
Disturbance 
An event, such as storm, fire, flood, drought, overgrazing or human activity, that changes a community and alters resource availability.
Disulphide Bridges 
Reinforce tertiary structure.
DNA ligase 
A linking enzyme essential for DNA replication; catalyzes the covalent bonding of the 3' end of a new DNA fragment to the 5' end of a growing chain.
DNA Methylation 
The addition of methyl groups to bases of DNA after DNA synthesis; may serve as a long-term control of gene expression.
DNA Polymerase 
An enzyme that catalyzes the formation of the DNA molecule.
DNA Sequencing 
Determining the exact order of the base pairs in a segment of DNA.
Domains 
Discrete structural and functional regions of proteins.
Dominant Allele 
An allele whose trait always shows up in the organism when the allele is present.
Dominant Species 
Species that are the most abundant or have the most biomass.
Dopamine 
Important neurotransmitter in the CNS that acts on the sympathetic nervous system.
Dormancy 
A condition typified by extremely low metabolic rate and a suspension of growth and development.
Double Fertilization 
A mechanism of fertilization in angiosperms, in which two sperm cells unite with two cells in the embryo sac to form the zygote and endosperm.
Downs Syndrome 
A congenital disorder caused by having an extra Chromosome 21.
Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy 
A human genetic disease caused by a sex-linked recessive allele; characterized by progressive weakening and a loss of muscle tissue.
Dynamic Stability Hypothesis 
Long food chains are less stable than short chains.
UNIT
E
Ecological Footprint 
Land and water area appropriated by each nation as a resource to consume or to absorb the waste it generates.
Ecological Niche 
Sum total of a species' use of the biotic and abiotic resources.
Ecological Succession 
Gradual recolonization of a disturbed area; species replaced by other species which are replaced by other species.
Ecology 
Study of interactions between organisms and the environment.
Ecosystem 
Consists of all the organisms living in a community as well as all the abiotic factors with which they interact.
Ectoparasites 
Parasites that feed on external surface of host.
Edocrine Glands 
Glands that secrete chemicals called hormones directly into the bloodstream.
Effector Cells 
Muscle cells or gland cells that carry out the body's response to stimuli.
Elastic Fibers 
Fibers made of elastin.
Electrochemical Gradient 
The combination of forces that acts on membrane potential.
Electrogenic Pump 
A transport protein that generates voltage across a membrane, causing a net separation in charge.
Electronegativity 
Attraction of an atom for electrons in a covalent bond.
Electron Transport Chain 
Breaks the fall of electrons to oxygen in several energy-releasing steps.
Electroporation 
A technique to introduce recombinant DNA into cells by applying a brief electrical pulse to a solution containing the cells. The pulse creates temporary holes in the cells' plasma membrane, through which DNA can enter.
Elicitors 
A molecule that induces a broad type of host defense response
Emigration 
Movement out of population. Decreases population size.
Enantiomers 
Structures that are like a mirror-image.
Endangered Species 
Species that is in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range.
Endergonic Reaction 
Reaction that absorbs free energy from its surroundings.
Endocrine Signaling 
Specialized cells release hormone molecules into vessels of the circulatory system, by which they travel to target cells in other parts of the body.
Endocrine System 
The system of glands that produce endocrine secretions that help to control bodily metabolic activity.
Endocytosis 
Occurs when a cell takes in biological molecules and particulate matter by forming new vesicles from the plasma membrane.
Endomembrane System 
A network of membranes inside and around a eukaryotic cell, related either through direct physical contact or by the transfer of membranous vesicles.
Endoparasites 
Parasites that live within the body of their host.
Endorphins 
Natural analgesics that decrease pain perception.
Endosperm 
In angiosperms, a nutrient-rich tissue formed by the union of a sperm with two polar nuclei during double fertilization. Provides nourishment to the developing embryo in angiosperm seeds.
Endospore 
A thick-walled protective spore that forms inside a bacterial cell and resists harsh conditions.
Endosymbiotic Theory 
Ancestors of mitochondria and plastids was prokaryotes thatcame to live in a host cell.
Endothermic 
Animals that are warmed mostly by heat generated by metabolism.
Energy Coupling 
The use of an exergonic process to drive an endergonic one.
Energy Hypothesis 
Length of a food chain is limited by the inefficiency of energy transfer.
Enhancer 
A DNA segment containing multiple control elements that can recognize certain transcription factors that stimulate the transcription of nearby genes.
Enteric Division 
One of three divisions of the autonomic nervous system; consists of networks of neurons in the digestive tract, pancreas, and gallbladder.
Entropy 
A measure of disorder or randomness.
Enzymatic Activity 
A protein built into the membrane with active site exposed.
Enzyme 
A catalytic protein.
Enzyme-Substrate Complex 
When an enzyme binds to its substrate, it forms:
Epigenetic Inheritance 
Inheritance of traits transmitted by mechanisms not directly involving the nucleotide sequence.
Epinephrine 
Neurotransmitter secreted by the adrenal medulla in response to stress. Also known as adrenaline.
Episome 
A genetic element that can exist either as a plasmid or as part of the bacterial chromosome.
Epithelial Tissue 
Tissue that covers outside of the body and lines organs and cavities.
Epitope 
Small, accessible portion of an antigen that can be recognized.
Equatorial-polar Gradients 
Species diversity highest at equator, decreases toward poles.
Erwin Chargaff 
Discovered that DNA composition varies, but the amount of adenine is always the same as thymine and the amount of cytosine is always the same as guanine.
Estivation 
Summer torpor. Enables animals to survive long periods of high temperatures and scarce water supplies.
Ethology 
The scientific study of how animals behave, particularly in natural environments.
Ethylene 
The only gaseous plant hormone. Among its many effects are response to mechanical stress, programmed cell death, leaf abscission, and fruit ripening.
Etiolation 
Plant morphological adaptations for growing in darkness.
Eukaryotic Cells 
Contain a nucleus and other organelles that are bound by membranes.
Eutrophication 
Sewage and fertilizer runoff adds nutrients to lakes; phytoplankton decreases and cyanobacteria increases.
Evapotranspiration 
Evaporation of water from soil plus transpiration from plants. Correlates with species richness.
Evolutionary Adaptation 
An accumulation of inherited characteristics that enhance organisms' ability to survive and reproduce in specific environments.
Exergonic Reaction 
Reaction that proceeds with a net release of free energy.
Exocytosis 
Occurs when a cell secretes certain biological molecules by the fusion of vesicles with the plasma membrane.
Exons 
Coding segments of eukaryotic DNA.
Exothermic 
Animals that gain heat mostly from external sources.
Exponential Growth 
Population increase under ideal conditions, when r > 0. Forms a J-shaped curve.
Expression Vector 
A cloning vector that contains the requisite prokaryotic promoter just upstream of a restriction site where a eukaryotic gene can be inserted.
Extremophiles 
Archaea that live in extreme environments.
UNIT
F
F1 Generation 
The hybrid offspring of true-breeding parents.
F2 Generation 
After the self-pollenization of the F1 generation, this is produced.
Facilitated Diffusion 
Passive diffusion that is aided by transport proteins, but that does not require cellular energy.
Facilitators 
Foundation species have positive effects on other species.
Facultative Anaerobes 
Can make enough ATP to survive using using fermentation or respiration.
Fate Maps 
A labor-intensive study to produce useful territorial diargams of embryonic development.
Feedback Inhibition 
A metabolic pathway is switched off by the inhibitory binding of its end product to an enzyme that acts early in the pathway.
Fermentation 
A partial degradation of sugars that occur without the use of oxygen.
Fertilization 
Union of gametes.
F Factor 
A piece of DNA that confers the ability form a sex pili.
Fibroblasts 
In connective tissue, cells that secrete the proteins of the fibers.
Fibrous Connective Tissue 
Dense tissue, large number of collagen fibers organized into parallel bundles. Includes ligaments and tendons.
First Law of Thermodynamics 
Energy can be transferred and transformed, but it cannot be created or destroyed.
Fitness 
Individuals whose inherited traits confer an advantage have a better chance of surviving in a given environment and will leave more offspring.
Fixed Action Patterns 
A sequence of unlearned behavioral acts that is unchangeable and usually carried to completion.
Flaccid 
This happens when water moves, but the amount within the cell is constant; no pressure builds.
Florigen 
A flowering signal, not yet chemically identified, that may be a hormone or may be a change in relative concentrations of multiple hormones.
Fluid Mosaic Model 
Structural model of the plasma membrane where molecules are free to move sideways within a lipid bilayer.
Food Web 
Linked food chains.
Foraging 
Behavior associated with recognizing, searching for, capturing, and consuming food.
Forebrain 
The largest and most complicated region of the brain, including the thalamus, hypothalamus, limbic system, and cerebrum.
Foundation Species 
Cause physical changes in environment that affect community structure.
Founder Effect 
When a small number of individuals colonize a new area; the new gene pool is not reflective of original population.
F Plasmid 
The plasmid form of the F factor.
Frameshift Mutation 
Mutation occurring when the number of nucleotides inserted or deleted is not a multiple of three, resulting in improper grouping of nucleotides into codons.
Frederick Griffith 
Discovered transformation during an experiment that involved injecting mice with smooth S cells, rough R cells, heat-killed S cells, and heat-killed S cells with living R cells.
Fredrick Sanger 
Determined amino acid sequence of proteins.
Free Energy 
Measures the portion of a system's energy that can perform work when temperature and pressure are uniform throughout the system, as in a living cell.
Fruit 
A mature ovary of a flower that protects dormant seeds and often aids in their dispersal.
Fruit Ripening 
A burst of ethylene production in a fruit triggers the ripening process.
Fundamental Niche 
The niche species could potentially occupy.
UNIT
G
G1 Phase 
The first gap, or growth phase, of the cell cycle, consisting of the portion of interphase before DNA synthesis begins.
G2 Phase 
The second growth phase of the cell cycle, consisting of the portion of interphase after DNA synthesis occurs.
GABA 
An inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain.
Gametes 
A haploid cell such as an egg or sperm that unite during sexual reproduction to produce a diploid zygote.
Game Theory 
Evaluates alternate strategies when outcome depends not only on each individual's strategy but also that of others.
Gametic Isolation 
When sperm can't fertilize the eggs.
Gametophyte 
The stage in the life cycle of a plant in which the plant produces gametes, or sex cells.
Ganglion 
A cluster of nerve cell bodies, often of similar function, located in the PNS.
Gated Channel 
A protein channel in a cell membrane that opens or closes in response to a particular stimulus.
Gel Electrophoresis 
The separation of nucleic acids or proteins, on the basis of their size and electrical charge, by measuring their rate of movement through an electrical field in a gel.
Gene Cloning 
The production of multiple copies of a gene.
Gene Expression 
Conversion of the information encoded in a gene first into messenger RNA and then to a protein.
Gene Families 
Groups of related genes in an organism's genome.
Gene Flow 
When a population gains or loses alleles., movement of alleles into or out of a population due to the migration of individuals to or from the population.
Gene-for-gene Recognition 
A widespread form of plant disease resistance involving recognition of pathogen-derived molecules by the protein products of specific plant disease resistance genes.
Gene Pool 
All the genes in a given population at a given time.
Genes 
Units of heredity made up of DNA.
Genetic Annealing 
Horizontal gene transfer between different bacteria and archae.
Genetic Drift 
Change in allele frequencies due to chance.
Genetic Engineering 
The direct manipulation of genes for practical purposes.
Genetic Map 
An ordered list of the genetic loci along a particular chromosome.
Genetic Recombination 
The regrouping of genes in an offspring that results in a genetic makeup that is different from that of the parents.
Genetics 
Scientific study of heredity and variation.
Genetic Variation 
Heritable variations in a population.
Genome 
The ordering of genes in a haploid set of chromosomes of a particular organism.
Genomic Equivalence 
All cells in an organism contain the same complement of genes. These are the same set of genes that are established in the fertilized egg.
Genomic Imprinting 
Variation in phenotype depending on whether an allele is inherited from the male or female parent.
Genomic Library 
A set of thousands of DNA segments from a genome, each carried by a plasmid, phage, or other cloning vector.
Genotype 
An organism's genetic makeup.
Genus 
First part of scientific name.
Geographic Variation 
Difference in variation between population subgroups in different areas.
Geometric Isomer 
Differ in arrangement around a double bond.
Gibberellins 
A class of related plant hormones that stimulate growth in the stem and leaves, trigger the germination of seeds and breaking of bud dormancy, and stimulate fruit development.
Glandualar Epithelia 
Tissue that absorbs or secretes chemical solutions.
Glial Cells 
Cells in the nervous system that support, nourish, and protect neurons.
Glucagon 
The antagonist of insulin that helps increase blood sugar. It stimulates the liver to break down glycogen into glucose.
Glutamate 
The most common neurotransmitter in the brain. Excitatory.
Glycogen 
Extremely branched polymer of glucose.
Glycolipids 
Membrane carbohydrates that are covalently bonded to lipids.
Glycolosis 
Breaking glucose into two molecules of a compound called pyruvate.
Glycoproteins 
Membrane carbohydrates that are covalently bonded to proteins.
Golgi Apparatus 
Stack of membranes in the cell that modifies, sorts, and packages proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum.
G-protein-linked Receptor 
A plasma membrane receptor that works with the help of a G-protein.
Gradualism 
A model of evolution in which gradual change over a long period of time leads to biological diversity.
Graft Versus Host Reaction 
When lymphocytes in donated bone marrow react against the recipient.
Gram-negative Bacteria 
Bacteria that have complex cell walls with less peptidoglycan but with lipopolysaccharides. Very toxic and hard to treat.
Gram-positive Bacteria 
Bacteria that have simple cell walls with much peptidoglycan.
Gram Stain 
Used to classify prokaryotes based on cell wall composition. Important for antibiotics; some antibiotics work on one but not the other.
Granum 
Stack of thylakoids.
Greenhouse Effect 
Carbon dioxide and water vapor in atmosphere trap infrared radiation, re-reflecting it back toward earth.
Green World Hypothesis 
Terrestrial herbivores consume relatively little plant biomass because they are held in check by predators, parasites and disease.
Grey Matter 
The portions of the central nervous system that are abundant in cell bodies of neurons rather than axons. Unmyelinated.
Gross Primary Production 
Amount of light energy that is converted to chemical energy by photosynthesis.
Growth Factors 
Regulatory proteins that ensure that the events of cell division occur in the proper sequence and at the correct rate.
Growth Factors 
Factors that stimulate the cell to divide.
UNIT
H
Habitat Isolation 
When two species encounter each other only rarely.
Habituation 
A loss of responsiveness to stimuli that convey little or no information.
Hamilton's Rule 
When C < r x B, where C = cost to the altruistic party; r = genetic relatedness; B = fitness benefit to recipient of altuism
Haplo Diploid System 
A sex determination system in most species of bees and ants in which there are no sex chromosomes. Females develop from fertilized eggs (diploid) and males develop from unfertilized eggs (haploid).
Haploid 
One set of chromosomes.
Hardy-Weinberg Theorem 
Helps measure changes in allele frequencies over time. Provides an "ideal" population to use as a basis of comparison.
Heat-shock Proteins 
Proteins that help maintain integrity of other proteins that would normally be denatured in extreme heat.
Helicase 
An enzyme that untwists the double helix at the replication forks, separating the two parental strands and making them available as template strands.
Helper T Cells 
Activate macrophages, B cells and T cells.
Hemophilia 
An X-linked recessive disorder in which blood fails to clot properly, leading to excessive bleeding if injured.
Heredity 
Transmission of traits from one generation to the next.
Hersey-Chase Experiment 
Devised an experiment that showed that only the DNA of T2 phages enters a bacterial cell during infection.
Heterochrony 
Change in the rate or timing of a developmental event; an organism's shape depends on relative growth rate of body parts.
Heterozygous Advantage 
Maintains recessive alleles in a population,
Hibernation 
Long-term torpor that is an adaptation to winter cold and food scarcity.
Hindbrain 
The posterior portion of the brain including cerebellum and brainstem.
Histamine 
Chemical stored in mast cells that triggers dilation and increased permeability of capillaries.
Histone Acetylation 
The attachment of acetyl groups to certain amino acids of histone proteins.
HIV 
The infectious agent that causes AIDS. HIV is a retrovirus.
Homeostasis 
"Steady state" or "constant internal milieu".
Homeotic Genes 
Genes that determine basic features of where a body part is.
Homologous Chromosomes 
Pair of chromosomes that are the same size, same appearance and same genes.
Homologous Structures 
Same structure, different function. Comes from common ancestor.
Homology 
Similarity resulting from common ancestry.
Homoplasies 
Analogous structures that have evolved independently.
Homozygous 
An organism having a pair of identical alleles for a character, either dominant or recessive.
Hormones 
Circulating chemical signals that are formed in specialized cells, travels in body fluids, and act on specific target cells.
Host Range 
The limited range of host cells that each type of virus can infect and parasitize.
Hox Genes 
Class of homeotic genes. Changes in these genes can have a profound impact on morphology.
Human Disturbance 
Reduces species diversity in all communities.
Human Genome Project 
An international collaborative effort to map and sequence the DNA of the entire human genome.
Humoral Immune Response 
The branch of acquired immunity that involves the activation of B cells and that leads to the production of antibodies, which defend against bacteria and viruses in body fluids.
Huntington's Disease 
Genetic disorder that causes progressive deterioration of brain cells. caused by a dominant allele. symptoms do not appear until about the age of 30.
Hybrid Breakdown 
Hybrid is fertile, but when they breed the next generation is sterile.
Hybridization 
The crossing of two true-breeding parents.
Hydrolysis 
Reaction where water split into two hydrogens and one oxygen; this breaks a polymer.
Hypersensitive Response 
A plant's localized defense response to a pathogen
Hypertonic 
Describes a solution that has a greater concentration of total solute.
Hypocotyl 
The part of a plant embryo directly below the cotyledons, forming a connection with the radicle.
Hypotonic 
Describes a solution that has a lesser concentration of total solute.
UNIT
I
Immigration 
New individuals moving into population. Increases population size.
Immunization 
The deliberate exposure of a pathogen to produce memory cells.
Immunoglobulins 
Secreted antibodies.
Imprinting 
Includes both learning and innate components, generally irreversible.
-in 
Suffix of a protein.
Inclusive Fitness 
The total effect an individual has on proliferating its genes by producing its own offspring and by providing aid that enables other close relatives to increase the production of their offspring.
Incomplete Dominance 
Creates a blended phenotype; one allele is not completely dominant over the other.
Incomplete Flower 
A flower in which one or more of the four basic floral organs such as sepals, petals, stamens, or carpels are either absent or nonfunctional.
Independent Assortment 
The random distribution of the pairs of genes on different chromosomes to the gametes.
Induced Fit 
Brings chemical groups of the active site into positions that enhance their ability to catalyze the chemical reaction.
Inducer 
A specific small molecule that inactivates the repressor in an operon.
Induction 
The process by which neighboring cells can influence the determination of a cell.
Infant Mortality 
Number of infant deaths per thousand live births.
Inflammtory Response 
Innate response with the purpose of containing a site of damage, localizing the response, eliminating the invader and restore tissue function.
Inflorescence 
A group of flowers tightly clustered together.
Innate Behavior 
A behavior that is developmentally fixed.
Innate Immunity 
Immunity that is present before exposure and effective from birth. Responds to a broad range of pathogens.
Inositol Triphosphate 
Produced by cleavage of a certain kind of phospholipid in the plasma membrane.
Insertion Sequence 
The simplest kind of transposable element, consisting of inverted repeats of DNA flanking a gene for transposase, the enzyme that catalyzes transposition.
Insulin 
Hormone produced by the pancreas that helps to decrease blood sugar.
Integral Proteins 
Integral proteins that span the membrane.
Intercellular Joining 
The function of membrane proteins in which membrane proteins of adjacent cells hook together, as in gap junctions or tight junctions.
Interferon 
Protein produced by cells in response to being infected by a virus; helps other cells resist the virus.
Intermediate Disturbance 
Moderate levels of disturbance can create conditions that foster greater species diversity.
Interphase 
Cell grows, performs its normal functions, and prepares for division; consists of G1, S, and G2 phases.
Interspecific Competition 
Species compete for a limiting resource. (-/-)
Interstitial Fluid 
Watery, internal environment of vertebrates.
Introns 
Noncoding segments of nucleic acid that lie between coding sequences.
Invasive Species 
Species generally introduced by humans, that take hold outside of their native range.
Inversion 
A type of mutation in which the order of the genes in a section of a chromosome is reversed.
Island Equilibrium Model 
Islands great for study due to isolation and limited size; can study species diversity and extinction rates.
Isomers 
Same atoms but different arrangement.
Isotonic 
Describes solutions that have an equal concentration of total solutes.
Iteroparity 
Repeated reproduction.
UNIT
J
Jasmonic Acid 
An important molecule in plant defense against herbivores.
UNIT
K
Karyotype 
Photograph of chromosomes grouped in order and in pairs.
Keystone Species 
Not necessarily abundant, but exert a strong control on community structure due to a pivotal ecological role.
Kinesis 
A simple change in activity or turning rate in response to a stimuli.
Kinetic Energy 
Energy associated with relative motion of objects.
Kinetochore 
A specialized region on the centromere that links each sister chromatid to the mitotic spindle.
Kinetochore Microtubules 
Connects the centrosome with the kinetochore in the centromere region of the chromosome.
Kin Selection 
Natural selection that favors altruistic behaviors by enhancing reproductive success of relatives.
K - Selected Species 
Life history traits sensitive to population density. Small number of large offspring, extensive parental care, repeated reproduction.
UNIT
L
Lactic Acid Fermetation 
When pyruvate is reduced directly by NADH to form lactic as am end product, with no release of carbon dioxide.
Lagging Strand 
A discontinuously synthesized DNA strand that elongates by means of Okazaki fragments, each synthesized in a 5' to 3' direction away from the replication fork.
The Law of Segregation 
Two alleles separate during gamete formation and end up in different gametes because they are on on homologous chromosomes.
Leading Strand 
The new continuous complementary DNA strand synthesized along the template strand in the mandatory 5' to 3' direction.
Leaf 
The major sites of photosynthesis in most plants.
Leaf Abscission 
Aging and dropping of leaves controlled by auxin and ethylene.
Learning 
The modification of behavior based on specific experiences.
Life Cycle 
All of the events in the growth and development of an organism until the organism reaches sexual maturity.
Life Expectancy at Birth 
Predicted average length of life at birth.
Life History 
Traits that affect an organism's schedule of reproduction and survival.
Life Tables 
Age-specific summaries of survival patterns of a population.
Ligaments 
Join bones to bones at joints.
Ligand 
Any molecule that bonds specifically to a receptor site of another molecule.
Ligand-gated Ion Channel 
Type of membrane receptor that has a region that can act as a "gate" when the receptor changes shape.
Light Limitation 
Depth to which light penetrates limits primary production.
Light Reaction 
Part of photosynthesis that involves light. ATP and NADPH are produced. Takes place on the thylakoid membrane.
Limiting Nutrient 
Greater limiting factor than light in oceans and lakes.
Linkage Map 
A genetic map based on recombination frequencies.
Linkage Map 
A genetic map based on the frequencies of recombination between markers during crossing over of homologous chromosomes.
Linked Genes 
Genes located on the same chromosome that tend to be inherited together in genetic crosses.
Liposomes 
Membrane-bound droplets that form when lipids are added to water.
Local Regulators 
These regulators influence cells in the vicinity of them.
Locus 
The specific site of a particular gene on its chromosome.
Logistic Growth 
When limiting factors restrict size of population to the carrying capacity of the environment. Forms an S-shaped curve.
Long-day Plant 
A plant that flowers only when the light period is longer than a critical length. Usually spring or early summer.
Loose Connective Tissue 
Tissue that binds epithelia to underlying tissues and holds organs in place. Contains collagenous, elastic, and recticular fibers.
Lymphocytes 
White blood cells.
Lyse 
Cell bursting.
Lysogenic Cycle 
A phage replication cycle in which the viral genome becomes incorporated into the bacterial host chromosome as a prophage and does not kill the host.
Lysosome 
A cell organelle that contains digestive enzymes.
Lytic Cycle 
A type of viral (phage) replication cycle resulting in the release of new phages by lysis (and death) of the host cell.
UNIT
M
Macroclimate 
Patterns on the global, regional and local level.
Macroevolution 
Evolutionary change above the species level.
Macrophages 
Amoeboid cells that roam connective tissue and engulf foreign particles and debris of dead cells.
Major Histocompatibility Complex 
Binds to a fragment of an antigen within a cell and presents it on the surface of the membrane.
Map Units 
A measurement of the distance between genes; one map unit is equivalent to a 1 percent recombination frequency.
Mark-recapture Method 
A sampling technique used to estimate wildlife populations.
Mate Choice Copying 
Individuals in a population copy mate choice of others.
Maximum Likelihood 
A principle that states that when considering multiple phylogenetic hypotheses, one should take into account the one that reflects the most likely sequence of evolutionary events, given certain rules about how DNA changes over time.
Maximum Parsimony 
"Occam's Razor." A principle that states that when considering multiple explanations for an observation, one should first investigate the simplest explanation that is consistent with the facts.
McCarty, Avery, and MacLeod 
Confirmed that the transforming agent in Griffith's experiment was DNA.
Mechanical Isolation 
Morphological differences prevent fertilization.
Medulla Oblongata 
Contains centers that control several visceral functions, including breathing, heart and blood vessel activity, swallowing, vomiting, and digestion.
Membrane Potential 
The voltage across a cell's plasma membrane.
Memory Cells 
General term for lymphocytes that are responsible for immunological memory and protective immunity.
Meselson and Stahl 
Determined that DNA replication is semiconservative.
Mesenteries 
Sheets of connective tissue in moist or fluid-filled body cavities.
Mesophyll 
Spongy tissue in the interior of the leaf where most chloroplasts are found.
mRNA
Carries genetic message from the DNA to he protein-synthesizing machinery of the cell.
Metabolic Pathway 
Begins with a specific molecule, which is then altered in a series of defined steps, resulting in a certain product.
Metabolic Rate 
Amount of energy an animal uses in a unit of time; the sum of all the energy-requiring biochemical reactions.
Metaphase Plate 
Plane midway between the two poles of the cell where chromosomes line up during metaphase.
Metapopulation 
When many populations are linked.
Methanogens 
Archaea that release methane, a greenhouse gas.
Microclimate 
Very fine patterns of climate influenced by features of the environment such as shade ares and wind patterns.
Microevolution 
Change in genetic makeup of a population from generation to generation.
Micro-RNA 
Small single stranded RNA molecules that bind to mRNA and can degrade mRNA or block its translation.
Midbrain 
Region between the hindbrain and the forebrain; it is important for hearing and sight.
Migration 
Relatively long-distance movement of individuals, usually on a seasonal basis.
Miller and Urey Experiment 
Experiment that found that organic molecules can form in a strongly reducing atmosphere.
Missense Mutations 
Most common type of mutation, a base pair mutation in which the new codon makes sense in that it still codes for an amino acid.
Mitochondria 
The organelles in which nutrients are converted to energy.
Mitosis 
Cell division in which the nucleus divides into nuclei containing the same number of chromosomes.
Mitotic Spindle 
An assemblage of microtubules and associated proteins that is involved in the movements of chromosomes during mitosis.
Monoecious 
If staminate and carpellate flowers are on the same plant.
Monogamous 
One male mating with one female.
Monohybrids 
Parents that are heterozygous for one character.
Monophyletic Group 
A taxonomic grouping that includes an ancestral species and all of its descendants.
Monosomic 
A chromosomal condition in which a particular cell has only one copy of a chromosome, instead of the normal two.
Morphogenesis 
The process by which an organism takes shape and the differentiated cells occupy their appropriate locations.
Motor Neurons 
Neurons that carry outgoing information from the central nervous system to the muscles and glands.
MPF 
A cyclin-Cdk complex that causes the cell to move from interphase into mitosis.
M Phase 
Mitosis and cytokinesis.
MRSA 
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
Mucous Membrane 
Membrane that secretes mucus that lubricates the surface of organs and keeps them moist.
Mullerian Mimicry 
Two or more unpalatable species resemble each other.
Multiple Fruit 
A fruit derived from an entire inflorescence.
Multiplication Rule 
To determine the probability, we multiply the probability of one event by the probability of another.
Muscle Tissue 
Tissue made of cells capable of contracting.
Mutagens 
Physical and chemical agents that interact with DNA to cause mutations
Mutations 
Random errors in gene replication that lead to a change in the sequence of nucleotides. The source of all genetic diversity.
Mutualism 
Interspecific interaction that benefits both species. (+/+)
Myelin Sheath 
A layer of electrical insulation that surrounds the axon.
UNIT
N
Natural Killer Cells 
These cells kill cancer cells and cells infected with viruses. They bind to their targets and deliver a lethal burst of chemicals to produce holes in the target cell's membrane leading to its destruction.
Natural Selection 
A population can change over time if individuals with more fit traits leave more offspring than less fit individuals.
Negative Feedback 
A type of regulation that responds to a change in conditions by initiating responses that will counteract the change. Maintains a steady state.
Nervous Tissue 
Tissue that senses stimuli and transmits signals.
Net Primary Production 
Energy used by primary producers for respiration.
Neuron 
Structural and functional unit of nervous system.
Neurosecretory Cells 
Neurons that secrete neurohormone rather than neurotransmitter.
Neurotransmitters 
Chemical messengers that cross the synaptic gaps between neurons.
Neutrophils 
Most abundant white blood cell., The most abundant type of white blood cell. Phagocytic and tend to self-destruct as they destroy foreign invaders, limiting their life span to a few days.
Niche 
Sum total of a species' use of the biotic and abiotic resources; an organism's "role".
Nitric Pxide 
Local regulator that regulates blood oxygen levels, A gas produced by many types of cells that functions as a local regulator and as a neurotransmitter.
Nodes of Ranvier 
Gaps in the myelin sheath to which voltage-gated sodium channels are confined.
Noncompetitive Inhibitors 
Impede enzymatic reactions by binding to another part of the enzyme (other than the active site).
Noncyclic Photophosphorolation 
Photosystem II performs photolysis to provide electrons for the electron transport chain that drives a chemiosmotic gradient that produces ATP.
Nondisjunction 
Error in meiosis in which homologous chromosomes fail to separate.
Nonequilibrium Model 
Communities are constantly changing after being buffeted by disturbances.
Nonpolar 
No partial charges. Do not mix with water.
Nonsense Mutations 
A mutation that changes an amino acid codon to one of three stop codons, resulting in a shorter and usually nonfunctional protein.
Nonshivering Thermogenesis 
When hormones cause mitochondria to produce heat instead of ATP in some mammals.
Nonsister Chromatids 
Different chromatids (maternal and paternal) of the same chromosome.
Norepinephrine 
A precursor of epinephrine that is secreted by the adrenal medulla and also released at synapses.
Nuclear Envelope 
Double membrane perforated with pores that control the flow of materials in and out of the nucleus.
Nuclear Lamina 
A netlike array of protein filaments lining the inner surface of the nuclear envelope; it helps maintain the shape of the nucleus.
Nuclear Transplantation 
A technique in which the nucleus of one cell is placed into another cell that already has a nucleus or in which the nucleus has been previously destroyed.
Nuclease 
A DNA cutting enzyme that excises damaged DNA.
Nucleic Acid Hybridization 
Base pairing between a gene and a complementary sequence on another nucleic acid molecule.
Nucleic Acid Probe 
Radioactively labeled nucleic acid molecule used to tag a particular DNA sequence.
Nucleoid 
A dense region of DNA in a prokaryotic cell.
Nucleolus 
Small, dense region within most nuclei in which the assembly of proteins begins.
UNIT
O
Okazaki Fragments 
Small fragments of DNA produced on the lagging strand during DNA replication, joined later by DNA ligase to form a complete strand.
Oligodendrocytes 
Type of glial cell in the CNS that wrap axons in a myelin sheath.
Oligosaccharins 
A type of elicitor that is derived from cellulose fragments released by cell wall damage
One Gene-one Polypeptide Hypothesis 
The premise that a gene is a segment of DNA that codes for one polypeptide.
Operant Conditioning 
Learning based on the consequences of responding.
Operator 
Region of DNA that controls RNA polymerase's access to a set of genes with related functions.
Operon 
A unit of genetic function common in bacteria and phages, consisting of coordinately regulated clusters of genes with related functions.
Optimal Foraging Theory 
Views foraging behavior as a compromise between benefits of nutrition and costs of obtaining food.
Organelles 
Structures specialized to perform distinct processes within a cell.
Organs 
Tissues are organized into:, group of tissues that work together to perform closely related functions.
Origins of Replication 
Site where the replication of a DNA molecule begins, consisting of a specific sequence of nucleotides.
Orthologous Genes 
Homologous genes passed in a straight line from one generation to the next.
-ose 
Suffix of a sugar.
Osmoregulation 
The control of water balance.
Osmosis 
The diffusion of water through a selectively permeable membrane.
Osteoblasts 
Bone-forming cells.
Outgroups 
Species or group of species closely related to the ingroup.
Ovary 
In flowers, the portion of a carpel in which the egg-containing ovules develop.
Ovule 
A structure that develops within the ovary of a seed plant and contains the female gametophyte.
Oxidation 
Loss of electrons.
Oxidative Phosphorylation 
When energy is released at each step of the chain is stored in a form the mitochondrion can use to make ATP.
Oxidizing Agent 
Accepts electrons and becomes reduced.
Ozone Layer 
Protective layer in atmosphere that shields earth from UV radiation.
UNIT
P
p680 
Reaction center chlorophyll in the photosystem II.
p700 
Reaction center cholophyll in the photosystem I.
Paracrine Signaling 
Signal released from a cell has an effect on neighboring cells.
Paralogous Genes 
Homologous genes that are found in the same genome as a result of gene duplication.
Paraphyletic Group 
A monophyletic group in which some descendants of the common ancestor have been removed.
Parasitoidism 
Insects that lay eggs on or in living host; larvae feed on body of host, eventually killing it. (+/-)
Parasympathetic Division 
A branch of the autonomic nervous system that maintains normal body functions; it calms the body ever conserves energy.
Parental Types 
Offspring with a phenotype that matches one of the parental phenotypes.
Passive Immunity 
Immunity conferred by transferring antibodies from an individual who is immune to a pathogen to another individual.
Passive Transport 
Transport of a substance across a cell membrane by diffusion. No cell energy required.
Pattern Formation 
The development of a spatial organization of tissues and organs.
Pedigree 
A diagram that shows the occurrence of a genetic trait in several generations of a family.
Peptide Bond 
Bonds that connect amino acids.
Peptidoglycan 
Cell wall of prokaryotes, but NOT ARCHAEA. Made of a sugar polymer and polypeptide.
Per Capita Death Rate 
Expected number of deaths in a population in a specified period of time.
Per Capita Offspring 
Average number of offspring produced per individual during a specified period of time.
Peripheral Nervous System 
The sensory and motor neurons that connect the CNS to the rest of the body.
Peripheral Proteins 
The proteins of a membrane that are not embedded in the lipid bilayer; they are appendages loosely bound to the surface of the membrane.
Peroxisome 
A microbody containing enzymes that transfer hydrogen from various substrates to oxygen, producing and then degrading hydrogen peroxide.
Petal 
A modified leaf of a flowering plant; petals are the often colorful parts of a flower that advertise it to insects and other pollinators.
P Generation 
The name for the true-breeding parents.
Phagocytosis 
Process in which extensions of cytoplasm surround and engulf large particles and take them into the cell.
Phagocytosis 
Process in which extensions of cytoplasm surround and engulf large particles and take them into the cell.
Phenotype 
An organism's traits.
Phosphodiester Bonds 
Bonds between phosphate group and pentose sugar in nucleic acids.
Phosphorylation 
The metabolic process of introducing a phosphate group into an organic molecule.
Photoautotrophs 
Organisms that use light as a source of energy to synthesize organic substances.
Photolysis 
In the thylakoid membranes of a chloroplast during light-dependant reactions, two molecules of water are split to form oxygen, hydrogen ions, and electrons.
Photomorphogenesis 
Effects of light on plant morphology.
Photoperiodism 
A physiological response to photoperiod, the relative lengths of night and day. An example of photoperiodism is flowering.
Photosystem 
A cluster of pigments embedded into a thylakoid membrane.
Phototropism 
Growth of a plant shoot toward or away from light.
Phylogenetic Trees 
Branching diagrams that depict hypotheses about evolutionary relationships.
Phylogeny 
Evolutionary history of a species or group of species.
Phylograms 
Diagram in which the length of a branch reflects number of changes in a DNA sequence.
Physical Map 
A genetic map in which the actual physical distances between genes or other genetic markers are expressed, usually as the number of base pairs along the DNA.
Physiology 
Study of the functions an organism performs.
Phytochromes 
A class of light receptors in plants. Mostly absorbing red light, these photoreceptors regulate many plant responses, including seed germination and shade avoidance.
Pigments 
Molecules that absorb, reflect, or transmit light.
Pilli 
Hollow tubes used to move cells or exchange DNA between bacteria by conjunction.
Pinocytosis 
A type of endocytosis in which the cell "gulps" droplets of fluid into tiny vesicles.
Pioneer Species 
The first species that colonize new area, such as lichen and mosses.
Pistil 
A single carpel or a group of fused carpels in a flower.
Plasma Membrane 
The membrane at the boundary of every cell that acts as a selective barrier, thereby regulating the cell's chemical composition.
Plasmid 
A small ring of DNA that carries accessory genes separate from those of a bacterial chromosome; also found in some eukaryotes, such as yeast.
Plasmids 
Small rings of DNA found naturally in some bacterial cells in addition to the main bacterial chromosome. Can contain genes for antibiotic resistance, or other "contingency" functions.
Plasmolysis 
This happens when a cell shrinks inside its cell wall while the cell wall remains intact.
Plasmolyze 
When the membrane shrinks away from the cell wall as a result of water loss.
Pluripotent 
Able to give rise to multiple, but not all, cell types.
Point Mutations 
Chemical changes in just one base pair of a gene
Polar 
Molecule with partial charges. Mixes with water.
Pollen Tube 
A tube that forms after germination of the pollen grain and that functions in the delivery of sperm to the ovule.
Polyandry 
One female, several males.
Poly-A Tail 
Modified end of the 3' end of an mRNA molecule consisting of the addition of some 50 to 250 adenine nucleotides.
Polygamous 
An individual of one sex mating with several of the other.
Polygenic Inheritance 
An additive effect of two or more genes on a single phenotypic character.
Polygyny 
One male, several females.
Polymerase Chain Reaction 
A technique for amplifying DNA in vitro by incubating with special primers, DNA polymerase molecules, and nucleotides.
Polyphyletic Group 
A taxonomic grouping consisting of several species that lack a common ancestor (more work is needed to uncover species that tie them together into a monophyletic clade).
Polyploidy 
In plants, the result of an extra set of chromosomes during cell division.
Polyribosomes 
Strings of ribosomes that work together to translate a RNA message.
Population 
Group of individuals of the same species living in the same area.
Population Density 
The size of the population within a particular unit of space.
Population Genetics 
Study of allele frequency distribution and change under the influence of evolutionary processes.
Positional Information 
The molecular cues that control pattern formation.
Positive Feedback 
A type of regulation that responds to a change in conditions by initiating responses that will amplify the change. Takes organism away from a steady state.
Postsynaptic Cell 
The neuron, muscle, or gland cell that receives the signal from a neuron.
Postzygotic Barriers 
Barriers that prevent the hybrid zygote from becoming a fertile adult.
Potential Energy 
Occurs when an object is not moving, but may still posses energy.
Potential Range 
An area where an organism could potentially survive and reproduce.
Pressure Potential 
This measurement has a minimum value of 0 (when the solution is open to the environment); it increases as pressure increases.
Presynaptic Cell 
The transmitting neuron in a synapse.
Prezygotic Barriers 
Barriers that impede mating or hinder fertilization.
Primary Consumer 
Herbivore.
Primary Electron Acceptor 
Specialized molecule that shares a reaction center with the chlorophyll a molecule in the light reaction. traps high energy electron before it can return to ground state in the chlorophyll.
Primary Immune Response 
Immune response the first time the body is exposed to a particular antigen. Does not peak until 10-17 days after exposure.
Primary Production 
Amount of light energy converted to chemical energy by autotrophs.
Primary Structure 
Chain of amino acids.
Primary Succession 
Succession that begins in a virtually lifeless area.
Primary Transcript 
The initial mRNA transcript that is transcribed from a protein coding gene. Also called pre-mRNA.
Primase 
An enzyme that joins RNA nucleotides to make the primer using the parental DNA strand as a template.
Production Efficiency 
The fraction of energy stored in food that was not used for cell respiration.
Promiscuous 
No strong pair bonds or lasting relationships.
Promoter 
A specific nucleotide sequence in DNA that binds RNA polymerase and indicates where to start transcribing mRNA.
Prophage 
A phage genome that has been inserted into a specific site on the bacterial chromosome.
Prostaglandins 
Modified fatty acids that are produced by a wide range of cells.
Proteasomes 
A giant protein complex that recognizes and destroys proteins tagged for elimination by the small protein ubiquitin.
Protein Kinase 
The enzyme that transfers phosphate groups from ATP to protein.
Protein Phosphatases 
Enzymes that can rapidly remove phosphate groups from proteins.
Protobionts 
Aggregates of abiotically produced molecules surrounded by a membrane.
Proton-Motive Force 
Emphasizes the capactiy of the gradient to preform work.
Proton Pump 
An electrogenic pump that works largely with H+ ions.
Provirus 
Viral DNA that inserts into a host genome.
Proximate Questions 
Address environmental stimuli, genetic, physiological, and anatomical causes of a behavior.
PR Protein 
A protein involved in plant responses to pathogens (PR = pathogenesis-related).
Punctuated Equilibrium 
A model of evolution in which a new species will change the most as it buds from a parent species, and then will change little for the rest of its existence.
Punnett Square 
A diagram for predicting the allele composition of offspring from a cross between individuals of known genetic makeup.
Purines 
Bases with a double-ring structure.
Pyrimidines 
Bases with a single-ring structure.
UNIT
Q
Quantitative Characteristics 
Characteristics that vary along a continuum, usually due to influence of two or more genes.
Quantitative Characters 
Characters that vary in the population along a continuum (in gradations).
Quaternary Consumer 
Carnivore that eats tertiary consumers.
Quaternary Structure 
Results from two or more polypeptide subunits.
UNIT
R
Radicle 
An embryonic root of a plant.
Radioisotopes 
Isotopes that have unstable nuclei and undergo radioactive decay.
Radiometric Dating 
Dating using decay of radioactive isotopes.
Random Dispersion 
Random spacing of individuals of the same species within an area.
Reaction Center 
The location of the first light driven chemical reaction of photosynthesis.
Reading Frame 
Reading mRNA nucleotides in the correct groupings.
Realized Niche 
The niche species actually occupies.
Receptacle 
The base of a flower; the part of the stem that is the site of attachment of the floral organs.
Reception 
The target cell's detection of a signal molecule coming from outside the cell.
Receptor-mediated 
A type of endocytosis in which the cell acquires bulk quantities of specific substances, even though they may not be very concentrated in the extracellular fluid.
Receptor Tyrosine Kinase 
A receptor with enzymatic activity that can trigger more than one signal transduction pathway at once, helping the cell regulate and coordinate many aspects of cell growth and reproduction.
Recessive Allele 
An allele that is masked when a dominant allele is present
Recombinant Chromosomes 
Chromosomes that carry genes from each parent.
Recombinant DNA 
A DNA molecule made in vitro with segments from different sources.
Recombinant Types 
Offspring who have inherited new combinations of genes and have phenotypes that don't match either parental phenotypes.
Recticular Formation 
Registers and controls activity level, increases excitement, and helps generate sleep.
Redox Reactions 
When there is a transfer of one or more electrons from one reactant to another.
Reduced Hybrid Fertility 
Sterile hybrids due to uneven chromosome number.
Reduced Hybrid Viability 
When the genes of different species interact and impair hybrid development.
Reducing Agent 
Donates electrons and becomes oxidized.
Reduction 
Gain of electrons.
Regulator 
An animal that uses internal control mechanisms to moderate internal change in the face of external fluctuation.
Regulatory Gene 
A gene that codes for a protein, such as a repressor, that controls the transcription of another gene or group of genes.
Relative Abundance 
The proportion of each species.
Relative Fitness 
Fitness of a particular genotype.
Repeated Reproduction 
Species that reproduce over and over.
Replication Fork 
A Y-shaped region on a replicating DNA molecule where new strands are growing.
Repolarization 
Return of the cell to resting state, caused by reentry of potassium into the cell while sodium exits the cell.
Repressor 
A protein that suppresses the transcription of a gene.
Reproductive Cloning 
Using a somatic cell from a multicellular organism to make one or more genetically identical individuals.
Reproductive Isolation 
Barriers that impede members of two different species fro producing fertile offspring.
Reproductive Rate 
Difference between per capita birth and per capita death rates.
Reproductive Rates 
Study of females to determine reproductive output and how it varies with age of female.
Reproductive Table 
Age-specific summary of reproductive rates in a population.
Resource Partitioning 
Differentiation of niches that enables similar species to coexist.
Response 
The transduced signal finally triggers a specific cellular response.
Resting Potential 
The membrane potential of a neuron that is at rest.
Restoration Ecology 
Applies ecological principles in an effort to return degraded ecosystems to conditions as similar as possible to their natural state.
Restriction Enzyme 
A degradative enzyme that recognizes and cuts up DNA (including that of certain phages) that is foreign to a bacterium.
Restriction Fragment 
The fragment of DNA that is produced by cleaving DNA with a restriction enzyme.
Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphisms 
Differences in the restriction sites on homologous chromosomes that result in different restriction fragment patterns.
Restriction Point 
A point of no return in the cell cycle; once this point passes, a cell is committed to a full round of the cell cycle.
Restriction Site 
A specific sequence on a DNA strand that is recognized as a cut siteby a restriction enzyme.
Reticular Fibers 
Fibers made of collagen fibers that are very thin and branched. Forma tightly woven fabric that joins connective tissue to adjacent tissues.
Retrovirus 
An RNA virus that reproduces by transcribing its RNA into DNA and then inserting the DNA into a cellular chromosome; an important class of cancer-causing viruses.
Reverse Transcriptase 
An enzyme encoded by some certain viruses (retroviruses) that uses RNA as a template for DNA synthesis.
Rh Factor 
Refers to the presence or absence of the Rh antigen on red blood cells.
Ribosomal A Site 
Site that holds the tRNA carrying the next amino acid to be added to the chain.
Ribosomal E Site 
Site where discharged tRNAs leave the ribosome.
Ribosomal P Site 
Site that holds tRNA carrying the growing polypeptide chain.
rRNA 
RNA molecules that construct ribosomal subunits.
Ribosomes 
Complex particles that facilitate the orderly linking of amino acids into polypeptide chains.
Ribozymes 
RNA molecules that function as enzymes.
RNA Interference 
Blocking gene expression by means of an miRNA silencing complex.
RNA Polymerase 
Enzyme that links together the growing chain of ribonucleotides during transcription.
RNA Processing 
The modification of mRNA before it leaves the nucleus that is unique to eukaryotes.
RNA Splicing 
Process by which the introns are removed from RNA transcripts and the remaining exons are joined together.
Rough ER 
A network of interconnected membranous sacs in a eukaryotic cell's cytoplasm; covered with ribosomes that make membrane proteins and secretory proteins.
R Plasmid 
A bacterial plasmid carrying genes that confer resistance to certain antibiotics.
R-Selected Apecies 
Life history traits maximize reproductive success in uncrowded environments. Many small offspring that mature quickly, little if any parental care.
Rubisco 
The most abundant protein on earth. Performs Carbon Fixation in the Calvin Cycle.
UNIT
S
Salicylic Acid 
A plant hormone that may be partially responsible for activating systemic acquired resistance to pathogens.
Scaffolding Proteins 
A type of large relay protein to which several other relay proteins are simultaneously attached to increase the efficiency of signal transduction.
Schwann Cells 
Type of glia in the PNS, Supporting cells of the peripheral nervous system responsible for the formation of myelin.
Secondary Consumer 
Carnivore that eats herbivores.
Secondary Immune Response 
Immune response after the body has already been exposed to a specific antigen. Response is faster, of greater magnitude, and more prolonged.
Secondary Production 
Amount of chemical energy in consumers' food that is converted to new biomass.
Secondary Structure 
Either an alpha helix or beta pleated sheet.
Secondary Succession 
Succession when an existing community has been cleared, but soil left intact.
Second Law of Thermodynamics 
Every energy transfer or transformation increases the entropy of the universe.
Second Messengers 
Small, non-protein water soluble molecules or ions that send messages throughout the cells by diffusion.
Seed Coat 
A tough outer covering of a seed, formed from the outer coat of an ovule.
Selective Permeability 
A property of a plasma membrane that allows some substances to cross more easily than others.
Self-Incompatibility 
The ability of a seed plant to reject its own pollen and sometimes the pollen of closely related individuals.
Semelparity 
Big-bang reproduction.
Semiconservative Model 
Type of DNA replication in which the replicated double helix consists of one old strand, derived from the old molecule, and one newly made strand.
Sensitive Period 
A limited phase in an animal's development that is the only time when certain behaviors can be learned.
Sensory Neurons 
Neurons that carry incoming information from the sense receptors to the central nervous system.
Sepal 
A modified leaf in angiosperms that helps enclose and protect a flower bud before it opens.
Serial Endosymbiosis 
Sequence of endosymbiotic events that led to an ancestral eukaryote.
Serotonin 
A neurotransmitter that affects hunger,sleep, arousal, and mood.
Sex Chromosomes 
X and Y chromosomes.
Sex Linked Genes 
Genes located on the sex chromosomes.
Sexual Dimorphism 
Differences between the sexes in secondary sexual characteristics.
Sexual Recombination 
Crossing over and shuffling of genes during meiosis.
Sexual Reproduction 
When two parents give unique combination of genes to offspring.
Sexual Selection 
Natural selection for mating success.
Shared Derived Character 
Evolutionary novelty unique to that clade.
Shared Primitive Character 
Trait shared beyond the taxon.
Short-Day Plant 
A plant that flowers only when the light period is shorter than a critical length. Usually fall or winter.
Sickle-Cell Disease 
Genetic disorder in which red blood cells have abnormal hemoglobin molecules and take on an abnormal shape.
Signal 
A behavior that causes change in another's behavior.
Signal Peptide 
A stretch of amino acids on a polypeptide that targets the protein to a specific destination in a eukaryotic cell.
Signal-Recognition Particle 
A protein-RNA complex that recognizes a signal peptide as it emerges from the ribosome.
Signal Transduction 
A series of molecular changes that converts a signal on a target cell's surface to a specific response inside the cell.
Signal Transduction Pathway 
The process by which a signal on a cell's surface is converted into a specific cellular response.
Sign Stimulus 
External sensory stimulus that triggers a fixed action pattern.
Simple Epithelium 
Single layer of cells.
Simple Fruit 
A fruit derived from a single carpel or several fused carpels.
Single-Strand Binding Protein 
Binds to and stabilizes single-stranded DNA until it can be used as a template.
siRNAs
RNAs of similar size and functions as miRNAs that inhibit gene expression.
Sister Chromatids 
Identical copies of a chromosome; full sets of these are created during the S subphase of interphase.
Skeletal Muscle 
Muscle that is striated, multinucleated.
Smooth ER 
Synthesis of lipids, phospholipids and steroid sex hormones-help detoxify drugs and poisons (liver cells).
Smooth Muscle 
Muscle that is not striated, is single nucleated.
Social Learning 
Learning through observing others.
Solute 
Something dissolved in a solution.
Solute Potential 
This measurement has a maximum value of 0; it decreases as the concentration of a solute increases.
Solvent 
Dissolving agent of a solution.
Somatic Cell 
Any of the cells of a plant or animal except the reproductive cells.
Southern Blotting 
A hybridization technique that enables researchers to determine the presence of certain nucleotide sequences in a sample of DNA.
Spatial Learning 
The modification of behavior based on experience with the spatial structure of the environment.
Speciation 
Origin of new species and the source of biological diversity.
Species-Area Curve 
The larger the geographic area, the greater the number of species.
Species Diversity 
Variety of different kinds of organisms that make up a community.
Species Richness 
Total number of different species.
Species Transplant 
Movement of a species to areas where it was previously absent.
Specific Epithet 
Second part of scientific name.
S Phase 
The synthesis phase of the cell cycle; the portion of interphase during which DNA is replicated.
Spirilla 
Spiral bacteria.
Splicosome 
Different particles that recognize splice sites are compiled in a large assembly. A complex of RNA and protein subunits. Removes introns from a transcribed pre-RNA segments.
Spores 
Produced by meiosis. Grow into haploid organisms by mitosis.
Sporophyte 
Diploid, or spore-producing, phase of an organism. Makes haploid spores by meiosis.
Squamous Epithelium 
Cells that are like floor tiles.
Stabilizing Selection 
Shift that favors the mean.
Stamen 
The pollen-producing reproductive organ of a flower, consisting of an anther and a filament.
Standard Metabolic Rate 
The metabolic rate of a resting, fasting, nonstressed ectotherm.
Starch 
Storage polysaccharide of plants.
Stem Cell 
Unspecialized cell that can both reproduce itself indefinitely and differentiate into specialized cells of one or more types.
Steroids 
Made of four rings of carbon.
Sticky End 
A single-stranded end of a double-stranded DNA restriction fragment.
Stigma 
The sticky part of a flower's carpel, which receives pollen grain.
Stomata 
Microscopic pores in the leaf which lets CO2 in and O2 out. Also where water is lost.
Stratified Epithelium 
Multiples tiers of cells.
Stroma 
The fluid of the chloroplast surrounding the thylakoid membrane; involved in the synthesis of organic molecules from carbon dioxide and water.
Stromatolites 
Oldest known fossils formed from many layers of bacteria and sediment.
Structural Isomers 
Differ in arrangement of atoms.
Style 
The stalk of a flower's carpel, with the ovary at the base and the stigma at the top.
Substrate-Level Phosphorylation 
When an enzyme transfers a phosphate group from a substrate molecule.
Survivorship Curves 
Graph of the proportion of a cohort still alive at each age.
Sympathetic Division 
The part of the autonomic nervous system that arouses the body to deal with perceived threats.
Sympatric Speciation 
Speciation without a divided population.
Synapse 
The junction between two neurons or between a neuron and a muscle.
Synapsis 
Homologous chromosomes pair up, aligned gene by gene.
Synaptic Cleft 
The narrow gap that separates the presynaptic neuron from the postsynaptic cell.
Synaptic Terminal 
A bulb at the end of an axon in which neurotransmitter molecules are stored and released.
Synaptic Vesicles 
Membrane-bounded compartments in which synthesized neurotransmitters are kept.
Synthesis 
To put together.
Systematics 
Analytical approach to understanding the diversity and relationships of present and past organisms.
Systemic Acquired Resistance 
A defensive response in infected plants that helps protect healthy tissue from pathogenic invasion.
UNIT
T
TATA Box 
A promoter DNA sequence crucial in forming the transcription initiation complex.
Taxis 
Automatic, oriented movement toward or away from some stimuli.
Taxonomy 
A classification of organisms into groups based on similarities.
Tay-Sachs 
disease A human genetic disease caused by a recessive allele that leads to the accumulation of certain lipids in the brain. Seizures, blindness, and degeneration of motor and mental performance usually become manifest a few months after birth.
T Cell Receptor 
Antigen receptors on a T cell. Unlike antibodies, T cell receptors are never produced in a secreted form.
Telomerase 
An enzyme that catalyzes the lengthening of telomeres in eukaryotic germ cells.
Telomeres 
Repeated DNA sequences at the ends of eukaryotic chromosomes.
Temperate Phage 
A phage that is capable of reproducing by either the lytic or lysogenic cycle.
Template Strand 
The DNA strand that provides the template for ordering the sequence of nucleotides in an mRNA transcript.
Temporal Isolation 
When two species breed at different times of day, season, or years.
Tendons 
Attach muscles to bones.
Terminator 
In prokaryotes, a special sequence of nucleotides in DNA that marks the end of a gene.
Territoriality 
Defense of a space against encroachment by other individuals.
Tertiary Consumer 
Carnivore that eats carnivores.
Tertiary Structure 
Results from interactions between side chains.
Testcross 
The result of breeding a recessive homozygote with an organism of dominant phenotype but unknown genotype.
Tetrad 
A pair of chromosomes form tetrads made up of four chromatids.
Thalamus 
Major input center for sensory information going to the cerebrum and the main output center for motor information leaving the cerebrum.
Therapeutic Cloning 
The cloning of human cells by nuclear transplantation for therapeutic purposes, such as the generation of embryonic stem cells to treat disease.
Thermal Energy 
Kinetic energy associated with the random movement of molecules or atoms.
Thermophiles 
Archaea that thrive in very hot environments, such as volcanic springs.
Thermoregulation 
Process of maintaining an internal temperature within a tolerable range.
Thoracic Cavity 
Cavity housing lungs and heart
Threatened Species 
Species that is likely to become endangered.
Threshold Potential 
The minimum membrane potential that must be reached in order for an action potential to be generated.
Thylakoid 
Membranous structures within a chloroplast that serve as the site for light harvesting in photosynthesis.
Thymus 
Gland in the thoracic cavity above the heart where T lymphocytes mature.
Tissues 
Groups of cells with a common structure and function.
T Lymphocytes 
Lymphocyte that matures in the thymus and acts directly against antigens in cell-mediated immune responses.
Tonicity 
The ability of a solution to cause a cell to gain or lose water; depends partly on concentration of nonpenetrating solutes relative to inside of cell.
Top-Down Model 
Influence moves from top trophic levels to bottom. (V <-- H)
Topoisomerase 
Enzyme that functions in DNA replication, helping to relieve strain in the double helix ahead of the replication fork.
Torpor 
Physiological state in which activity is low and metabolism decreases.
Totipotent 
Stem cells with the potential to differentiate into any type of cell.
Totipotent 
Cells that are able to develop into any type of cell found in the body.
Trait 
Each variant of a character.
Transcription 
Synthesis of an RNA molecule from a DNA template.
Transcription Factors 
Collection of proteins that mediate the binding of RNA polymerase and the initiation of transcription.
Transcription Tnitiation Complex 
The assembly of transcription factors and RNA polymerase.
Transduction 
The binding of the signal molecule changes the receptor protein in some way.
tRNA 
Interpreter of a series of codons along a mRNA molecule.
Transformation 
A change in genotype and phenotype due to the assimilation of external DNA by a cell.
Translation 
The synthesis of a polypeptide, which occurs under the direction of mRNA.
Translocation 
Change to a chromosome in which a fragment of one chromosome attaches to a nonhomologous chromosome.
Transmembrane Proteins 
Integral proteins that span the membrane.
Transport 
An exchange of molecules (and their kinetic energy and momentum) across the boundary between adjacent layers of a fluid or across cell membranes.
Transport Protein 
A membrane protein, specifically a transport protein, that has a hydrophilic channel that certain molecules or atomic ions use as a tunnel.
Transport Vesicles 
Vesicles in transit from one part of the cell to another.
Transposable Genetic Element 
A segment of DNA that can move within the genome of a cell by means of a DNA or RNA intermediate; also called a transposable element.
Transposon 
A transposable genetic element that moves within a genome by means of a DNA intermediate.
Triple Response 
A plant growth maneuver in response to mechanical stress, involving slowing of stem elongation, a thickening of the stem, and a curvature that causes the stem to start growing horizontally.
Triplet Code 
Three-nucleotide long set that specifies a specific amino acid for a polypeptide chain.
Trisomic 
A chromosomal condition in which a particular cell has an extra copy of one chromosome, instead of the normal two.
Trophic Efficiency 
Percentage of production transferred from one trophic level to the next.
Trophic Structure 
Feeding relationships between organisms in a community.
Tropism 
A growth response that results in the curvature of whole plant organs toward or away from stimuli owing to differential rates of cell elongation.
True-Breeding 
Organisms that, when reproducing, create offspring of all the same variety.
Tryiacylglycerol 
Glycerol and three fatty acids.
Turgid 
A cell with a cell wall that has a reasonable amount of pressure but is healthy.
Turgor Pressure 
The pressure inside of a cell as a cell pushes itself against the cell wall.
Turnover 
Seasonal changes in warm and cool water layers in lakes.
Turnover Time 
Standing crop biomass compared to production.
Type I 
Curve that shows low death rate at early and mid-life and drops at old age, as seen in humans and large animals.
Type II 
Curve that represents constant death rate over lifespan small animals and invertebrates.
Type III 
Curve that drops sharply at the start then levels off once individuals reach a critical age, as seen in organisms that produce large numbers of offspring.
UNIT
U
Ultimate Questions 
Address evolutionary significance of a behavior.
Ultrametric Trees 
Diagram in which length of a branch reflects amounts of actual time.
Uniform Dispersion 
The pattern in which individuals are equally spaced throughout a habitat.
UNIT
V
Vaccine 
A harmless variant or derivative of a pathogen that stimulates a host's immune system to mount defenses against the pathogen.
Variation 
Is demonstrated by the differences in appearance that offspring show from parents and siblings.
Vasoconstriction 
Reduces blood flow and heat transfer by decreasing the diameter of superficial blood vessels.
Vasodialation 
Increases in the diameter of superficial blood vessels; cools the body.
Veins 
Bundles of xylem and phloem.
Vernalization 
The use of cold treatment to induce a plant to flower.
Vesicle 
Small membrane-bound sac that functions in moving products into, out of, and within a cell.
Vestigial Structures 
Are little or no importance to organism, but remain from an ancestor.
Viral Envelope 
A membrane that cloaks the capsid that in turn encloses a viral genome.
Voltage-Gated Ion Channels 
Channels that open or close in response to a change in the membrane potential.
UNIT
W
Water Potential 
The physical property predicting the direction in which water will flow, governed by solute concentration and applied pressure.
Watson and Crick 
Developed the double helix model of DNA.
White Matter 
Whitish nervous tissue of the CNS consisting of neurons and their myelin sheaths.
Wobble 
Flexibility in the base-pairing rules in which the nucleotide at the 5' end of a tRNA anticodon can form hydrogen bonds with more than one kind of base in the third position of a codon.
UNIT
X
X Linked Genes 
Genes found on the X chromosome.
XO System 
A sex determination system in some insects in which O stands for the absence of a sex chromosome. Females are XX, Males are XO. Males produce two classes of sperm: X sperm and sperm with no chromosome. The sperm determines the sex of the offspring.
XY System 
A sex determination system in which females have two of the same kind of sex chromosome and males have two different ones.
UNIT
Y
Yeast Artificial Chromosome 
A cloning vector that has telomeres and a centromere that can accommodate large DNA inserts and uses the eukaryote yeast as a host cell.
UNIT
Z
Zero Population Growth 
When per capita birth and death rates are equal. (r = 0)
ZW System 
A sex determination system in fish, butterflies, birds where males are ZZ and Females are ZW. The egg determines the sex of the offspring.
Zygote 
Fertilized egg. Carries one set of chromosomes from each parent.